.Dd April 11, 2025
.Dt TAP 5
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm tap
.Nd format of treetap package files
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
package format combines a
.Nm ed25519ph
signature for verification of trust, a
.Nm tar
archive containing package metadata and update scripts, and a
.Nm tar
archive containing the files to be installed.
.Pp
The format is designed primarily for distribution of software packages with
the
.Nm treetap
package manager, initially developed for Maple Linux.
.Sh General Format
A
.Nm
package is made of four sequential segments:
.Bl -enum
.It
A header describing the size and
compression format used by the latter three segments
.It
An
.Nm ed25519ph
signature signing the remainder of the file
.It
A compressed
.Nm tar
archive containing implementation-defined metadata files
.It
A compressed
.Nm tar
archive containing files to be installed at the root directory of the system
by the
.Nm treetap
package manager
.El
.Ss Tap Header
The header structure for version 0 of the
.Nm
package format is as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct ttap_header {
  char[4] magic;
  uint8_t version;
  char[4] compression_format;
  uint8_t signature_size;
  uint64_t control_size;
  uint64_t data_size;
};
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va magic
Contains the magic value
.Dq tap\e0
.It Va version
This should be
.Dq 0
for the current version
.It Va signature_size
This is the length of the signature segment in bytes. The signature segment
immediately follows this header
.It Va compression_format
This specifies the compression format that is used for the control and data
archive segments of the file. Currently, the following are supported:
.Bl -tag -width indent-two
.It Dq gzip
Signifies the
.Nm gzip
compression format
.It Dq zstd
Signifies the
.Nm zstd
compression format
.It Dq lzma
Signifies the
.Nm lzma
compression format
.It Dq bz2\e0
Signifies the
.Nm bzip2
compression format
.It Dq none
Signifies the lack of compression
.El
.It Va control_size , Va data_size
The length in bytes of the control and data archive segments, which are stored
sequentially following the signature.
.El
.Ss Signature Block
The signature block immediately follows the header and has a size defined by the
.Va signature_size
value defined within.
.Pp
The signature stored within this block is an
.Nm ed25519ph
signature, signing the remainder of the file following the signature block.
This is done to ensure that no decompression needs to be done in order to verify
the trustworthiness of the
.Nm
package.
.Pp
This signature is to be generated with the
.Fn crypto_sign_detached
method provided by
.Nm libsodium
, applied to the remaining two sections at the end of the file.
.Pp
The representation of the signature is stored as follows:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct signature_block {
  char fingerprint[];
  char signature[];
};
.Ed
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Va keyname
A null-terminated ascii string containing the signing key's fingerprint,
which can be used to fetch the matching public key from the system's trust store
, which can be used to verify the signature.
.It Va signature
Raw binary data that comprises the remainder of the segment, containing the
result of the signature calculation.
.El
.Ss Control Segment
This segment consists of a potentially compressed
.Nm tar
archive which is to contain
implementation-defined metadata about the package stored within the file.
.Pp
The tar file stored within the segment is compressed using the method described
by
.Va compression_format
within the header, and contains PAX extended attributes.
.Nm
makes use of a specially named attribute
.Dq TAP-SHA1
which contains a
.Nm SHA1
hash of the entry's contents to assist in ensuring file integrity.
.Pp
There is no currently defined convention for what the section should contain,
but there are a few general recommendations:
.Bl -bullet -offset indent
.It
Package Metadata
.It
Install and uninstall hooks, for example rebuilding the fontconfig cache
.It
Changelog information
.El
.Ss Data Segment
This segment consists of a potentially compressed
.Nm tar
archive which contains a file structure intended to be extracted at the root
of a system's filesystem.
.Pp
The tar file stored within this segment is compressed using the method described
by
.Va compression_format
within the header, and contains the same
.Dq TAP-SHA1
PAX extended attribute as described in
.Sx Control Segment .
